# Bruce Springsteen and me

15 December 2014

In the early 2000s, there used to be a music programme on Channel 4 called All Back to Mine. The host was this blokey guy in a check shirt called Sean Rowley. It was basically Desert Island Discs but less highbrow. In one episode, the Manic Street Preachers frontman James Dean Bradfield went through his favourite songs, and it was here that I first encountered someone taking the music of Bruce Springsteen seriously. Bradfield chose a song off Born to Run and made some reverent noises about Bruce and working-class America. To the extent that I’d heard of Springsteen – which was very little at that time – I was faintly aware that he was supposed to be some kind of a joke, a guilty pleasure at best.

A few weeks later, I was in my village library flicking through their meagre selection of CDs, and to my surprise I came across a copy of Born to Run. On the cover, Bruce looked like a ragged hobo rock ‘n’ roller with a Telecaster slung loosely over his shoulder. Clarence Clemmons made an appearance on the reverse, sporting a wide-brimmed hat, tight leather pants and a saxophone in between his pursed lips. I took the CD home, and after one listen realised that this was a special discovery. I made a tape of the album and started evangelising about it to my friends, whose initial suspicion gradually gave way to a fervent enthusiasm of their own. I immediately gave Born to Run a hallowed slot in in my top 5 albums of all time, probably squeezed in next to The Holy Bible by Manic Street Preachers. While my love of the Manics’ juvenile posturing faded with the years, Bruce and I have always maintained a strong emotional bond. I was there with him as he drove off with Mary in Thunder Road. Presumably I was sitting in the back seat with a stupid grin on my face.

> “It’s a town full of losers, I’m pulling out of here to win,”

he sang, and I thought yeah, my quaint little Sussex village is a town full of losers, and I’m gonna pull out of here to win.

Looking back, I honestly don’t know what I was thinking. Even then, I probably couldn’t have justified it. Maybe I would have mumbled something about how the other people in my village had all settled down for a life of mediocrity, with their jobs and insurance plans.

Now I have a job, but only wish I could afford luxuries like insurance. Except the car insurance, but that’s a legal necessity. I’m talking about things like home and contents insurance: the mark of someone who has settled down in life.

Maybe it was the arrogance of my late teens that Springsteen tapped into there, the idea that the Randian power of my ambition was going to take me away from the trappings of my small town life. I didn’t realise that the song was actually laced with tragedy. Bruce was one step ahead of me. The characters in that song weren’t really pulling out of there to win; the dream they were chasing would inevitably be put just out of their reach. If you’d followed up on Mary a few years later, you’d find her working in a factory with bitter memories and a smoker’s cough.

That’s one of Bruce’s talents: on his best albums, he infused the happiest of songs with a kind of nostalgic sadness that’s hard to find in his branch of rock music. When Clarence Clemmons plays towards the end of Jungleland, it’s like the desperation of the inner city has finally found its form in a saxophone solo. Louis CK paid tribute to it in a nice little story here.

The oddest thing about Born to Run‘s resonance with me is that I really had very little in common with the characters in the songs. I was a badly dressed sixth-form student with big curly hair and a friendly, supportive family. I’d grown up in a middle-class Guardian-reading house and was thinking about studying Philosophy at university. How was it that I identified with songs like Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out and Backstreets? Was it just a fantasy of mine to live a struggling existence in 1970s New Jersey? Or was it simply that I liked the tunes?

To some extent, both of these explanations are true. But just as important were the universal themes that Springsteen sang about. An old-fashioned notion of romance; the struggle between right and wrong; chasing something elusive that other people seem to have given up on. Sure, the stories had an alluring shell of girls, guitars and shiny American cars, but under the surface they tapped into something deep.

Years later, on a road trip through Portugal with my soon-to-be wife, a song came on the radio. It sounded like it was from Springsteen’s 80s synth period, but wasn’t one I’d heard before. I had the same feeling of discovery I’d had at 17 when I put Born to Run in my CD player. When we got home, I looked it up online based on a fragment of the lyrics that I’d scribbled down on a bit of paper. The song was Sad Eyes, and it made my love of Springsteen just that bit deeper.